website/integrations: improve Gitea doc (#14194)
goauthentik/authentik: website/integrations/services/gitea/index.md

- **Choose a Provider type**: select **OAuth2/OpenID Connect** as the provider type.
- **Configure the Provider**: provide a name (or accept the auto-provided name), the authorization flow to use for this provider, and the following required configurations.
    - Note the **Client ID**,**Client Secret**, and **slug** values because they will be required later.

>     - Set a `Strict` redirect URI to `https://<gitea.company>/user/oauth2/authentik/callback`.

Reviewer: @tanberry Why is this needed? We indicate in preparation that gitea.company is a placeholder and thus we don't need to mark it as a variable

- **Configure the Provider**: provide a name (or accept the auto-provided name), the authorization flow to use for this provider, and the following required configurations.
    - Note the **Client ID**,**Client Secret**, and **slug** values because they will be required later.
    - Set a `Strict` redirect URI to `https://gitea.company/user/oauth2/authentik/callback`.
    - Select any available signing key.
- **Configure Bindings** _(optional)_: you can create a [binding](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage the listing and access to applications on a user's **My applications** page.

3. Click **Submit** to save the new application and provider.

## Gitea configuration

1. Log in to Gitea as an admin. Click on your profile icon at the top right > **Site Administration**.
2. Select the **Authentication Sources** tab and click **Add Authentication Source**.
3. Set the following required configurations:
    - **Authentication Name**: `authentik` (This must match the name used in the Redirect URI in the previous section)
    - **OAuth2 Provider**: `OpenID Connect`

>     - **Client ID (Key)**: authentik client ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Client ID (Key)**: Enter the Client ID from authentik
```

>     - **Client Secret**: authentik client Secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Client Secret**: Enter the Client Secret from authentik
```

    - **Icon URL**: `https://authentik.company/static/dist/assets/icons/icon.svg`
    - **OpenID Connect Auto Discovery URL**: `https://authentik.company/application/o/<application-slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration`
    - **Additional Scopes**: `email profile`

![](./gitea1.png)

4. Click **Add Authentication Source**.

### Claims for authorization management (optional)

:::note
This step is **optional** and shows how to set claims to control the permissions of users in Gitea by adding them to groups.
:::

#### Create groups

The following groups will be created:

- `gituser`: normal Gitea users.
- `gitadmin`: Gitea users with administrative permissions.
- `gitrestricted`: restricted Gitea users.

:::note
Users who are in none of these groups will not be able to log in to gitea.
:::

1. Log in to authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Directory** > **Groups** and click **Create**.
3. Set the name of the group as `gituser` and click **Create**.

> 4. Repeat steps 2-3 and create groups named `gitadmin` and `gitrestricted`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 to create two additional groups named `gitadmin` and `gitrestricted`.
```

> 5. In turn, click the names of the newly created groups and navigate to the **Users** tab.

Reviewer: > In turn,

Are we sure the average reader will get what you mean? Especially to non-native speakers?

:::Note
Users can be added to the groups at any point
:::

#### Create custom property mapping

1. Log in to authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Customization** > **Property Mappings** and click **Create**. Create a **Scope Mapping** with the following configurations:

    - **Name**: Choose a descriptive name (.e.g `authentik gitea OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'gitea'`)
    - **Scope name**: `gitea`
    - **Expression**:

    ```python showLineNumbers
    gitea_claims = {}

    if request.user.ak_groups.filter(name="gituser").exists():
        gitea_claims["gitea"]= "user"
    if request.user.ak_groups.filter(name="gitadmin").exists():
        gitea_claims["gitea"]= "admin"
    if request.user.ak_groups.filter(name="gitrestricted").exists():
        gitea_claims["gitea"]= "restricted"

    return gitea_claims
    ```

3. Click **Finish**.

#### Add the custom property mapping to the Gitea provider

1. Log in to authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click on the **Edit** icon of the Gitea provider.

> 3. Under **Advanced protocol settings** > **Scopes** add the following scopes to **Selected Scopes**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Under **Advanced protocol settings** > **Scopes**, add the following scopes to the **Selected Scopes** dropdown:
```

Reviewer: mabye no "dropdown"?

    - `authentik default OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'email'`
    - `authentik default OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'profile'`
    - `authentik default OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'openid'`
    - `authentik gitea OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'gitea'`

4. Click **Update**.

#### Configure Gitea to use the new claims

:::note

> For this to function, the Gitea `ENABLE_AUTO_REGISTRATION: true` variable must be set.

Reviewer: Can we use KEY=value format?

Author: They use the Key:value format in their own docs, so I wanted to keep it consistent with that. I've added a link to their docs so that users can have more info.

:::

1. Log in to Gitea as an admin. Click on your profile icon at the top right > **Site Administration**.
2. Select the **Authentication Sources** tab and edit the **authentik** Authentication Source.

> 3. Set the following configurations:

Reviewer: Could we update this to tell the user to edit the form?

    - **Additional Scopes**: `email profile gitea`
    - **Required Claim Name**: `gitea`
    - **Claim name providing group names for this source.** (Optional): `gitea`
    - **Group Claim value for administrator users.** (Optional - requires claim name to be set): `admin`
    - **Group Claim value for restricted users.** (Optional - requires claim name to be set): `restricted`
4. Click **Update Authentication Source**.

:::note
Users without any of the defined groups will no longer be able to log in.
Users of the group **gitadmin** will have administrative privileges, and users in the group **gitrestricted** will be restricted.
:::

### Helm Chart Configuration

> Authentik can be configured automatically in Gitea Kubernetes deployments via it's [Helm Chart](https://gitea.com/gitea/helm-chart/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentik can be configured automatically in Kubernetes deployments using it's [Helm chart](https://gitea.com/gitea/helm-chart/).
```
Uppercase `authentik`, interesting. As for helm charts... I had to Google it and I'm even more perplexed than before: 
<img width="701" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/15d0671d-9791-4753-b013-354f19162377" />
Uppercase and lowercase C is used in screenshot ^^ Redhat uses lowercase (https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/devops/what-is-helm), so let's go lowercase?

Reviewer: When used alone, it takes a capital letter, like a proper noun. We could mabye use Charts at some place to avoid repetition?

Add the following to your Gitea Helm Chart `values.yaml` file:

```yaml showLineNumbers title="values.yaml"
gitea:
    oauth:
        - name: "authentik"
        provider: "openidConnect"

>         key: "CLIENT_ID_FROM_AUTHENTIK" #Step 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        key: "<Client ID from authentik>" #Step 1
```

>         secret: "CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_AUTHENTIK" #Step 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        secret: "<Client secret from authentik>" #Step 1
```

>         autoDiscoverUrl: "https://authentik.company/application/o/gitea-slug/.well-known/openid-configuration"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        autoDiscoverUrl: "https://authentik.company/application/o/<slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration"
```

>         iconUrl: "https://goauthentik.io/img/icon.png"

Reviewer: Can we use the same icon url as in docker?

Author: Do we have a permanent link to a jpg/png version of it?

Reviewer: mabye the dist url like above?

        scopes: "email profile"
```

### Kubernetes Secret

Alternatively you can use a Kubernetes secret to set the `key` and `secret` values.

> 1. Create a Kubernetes secret with the following configurations:

Reviewer: Not sure about "Following configurations"

- **Configure the Provider**: provide a name (or accept the auto-provided name), the authorization flow to use for this provider, and the following required configurations.
    - Note the **Client ID**,**Client Secret**, and **slug** values because they will be required later.
    - Set a `Strict` redirect URI to `https://gitea.company/user/oauth2/authentik/callback`.
    - Select any available signing key.
- **Configure Bindings** _(optional)_: you can create a [binding](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage the listing and access to applications on a user's **My applications** page.

3. Click **Submit** to save the new application and provider.

## Gitea configuration

1. Log in to Gitea as an admin, then click on your profile icon at the top right and select **Site Administration**.
2. Select the **Authentication Sources** tab and then click on **Add Authentication Source**.
3. Set the following required configurations:
    - **Authentication Name**: `authentik` (This must match the name used in the **Redirect URI** in the previous section)
    - **OAuth2 Provider**: `OpenID Connect`

>     - **Client ID (Key)**: Enter the client ID from authentik.

Reviewer: Same thing with `c`lient here

>     - **Client Secret**: Enter the Client Secret from authentik.

Reviewer: Should we capitalize `S`ecret? I think some of my comments don't capitalize it, but i'd like for us (and potentially Tana) to come to a conclusion and add it to the style guide

    - **Icon URL**: `https://authentik.company/static/dist/assets/icons/icon.svg`
    - **OpenID Connect Auto Discovery URL**: `https://authentik.company/application/o/<application-slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration`
    - **Additional Scopes**: `email profile`

![](./gitea1.png)

4. Click **Add Authentication Source**.

### Claims for authorization management (optional)

:::note

> This step is **optional** and shows how to set claims to control the permissions of users in Gitea by adding them to groups.

Reviewer: Don't we tell users to use italic in the style guide to put emphasis on stuff? An example of "optional" would be in the authentik config template where we use italic for that last line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step is *optional* and shows how to set claims to control the permissions of users in Gitea by adding them to groups.
```

    - `authentik default OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'profile'`
    - `authentik default OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'openid'`
    - `authentik gitea OAuth Mapping: OpenID 'gitea'`

4. Click **Update**.

#### Configure Gitea to use the new claims

:::note
For this to function, the Gitea `ENABLE_AUTO_REGISTRATION: true` variable must be set. More information on configurations variables in the [Gitea Configuration Cheat Sheet](https://docs.gitea.com/administration/config-cheat-sheet).
:::

1. Log in to Gitea as an admin. Click on your profile icon at the top right > **Site Administration**.
2. Select the **Authentication Sources** tab and edit the **authentik** Authentication Source.
3. Set the following configurations:
    - **Additional Scopes**: `email profile gitea`
    - **Required Claim Name**: `gitea`
    - **Claim name providing group names for this source.** (Optional): `gitea`
    - **Group Claim value for administrator users.** (Optional - requires claim name to be set): `admin`
    - **Group Claim value for restricted users.** (Optional - requires claim name to be set): `restricted`
4. Click **Update Authentication Source**.

:::note

> Users without any of the defined groups will no longer be able to log in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users who are not part of any defined group will be denied login access.
```

> Users of the group **gitadmin** will have administrative privileges, and users in the group **gitrestricted** will be restricted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, members of the `gitadmin` group will have full administrative privileges, while those in the `gitrestricted` group will have limited access
```

:::

### Helm Chart Configuration

> authentik can be configured automatically in Kubernetes deployments using its [Helm chart](https://gitea.com/gitea/helm-chart/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gitea can be configured automatically in Kubernetes deployments using its [Helm chart](https://gitea.com/gitea/helm-chart/).
```

Reviewer: IDK technically it's authentik's OIDC which can be configured automatically in gitea

> Add the following to your Gitea Helm chart `values.yaml` file:

Reviewer: I would not repeat the file name twice, once here and once below

```yaml showLineNumbers title="values.yaml"
gitea:
    oauth:
        - name: "authentik"
        provider: "openidConnect"
        key: "<CLIENT_ID_FROM_AUTHENTIK>" #Step 1

>         secret: "<CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_AUTHENTIK>" #Step 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        secret: "<Client secret from authentik>"
```

        autoDiscoverUrl: "https://authentik.company/application/o/<slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration"
        iconUrl: "https://authentik.company/static/dist/assets/icons/icon.png"
        scopes: "email profile"
```

### Kubernetes Secret

> Alternatively you can use a Kubernetes secret to set the `key` and `secret` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also utilize a Kubernetes Secret object to store and manage the sensitive `key` and `secret` values.
```

1. Create a Kubernetes secret with the following variables:

> ```yaml showLineNumbers

Reviewer: Can we add a suggested file name here, or is it best not to?

Author: I think it's best to leave it to the user otherwise it might seem like the name is required in some way

apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
    name: gitea-authentik-secret
type: Opaque
stringData:

>     key: "<CLIENT_ID_FROM_AUTHENTIK>" #Step 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    key: "<Client ID from authentik>"
```

    secret: "<CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_AUTHENTIK?" #Step 1
```

2. Add the following configurations to your Gitea Helm Chart `values.yaml` file:

```yaml showLineNumbers title="values.yaml"
gitea:
    oauth:
        - name: "authentik"
        provider: "openidConnect"
        existingSecret: gitea-authentik-secret

>         autoDiscoverUrl: "https://authentik.company/application/o/<slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration"

Reviewer: Can we use consistent slug naming, `<slug> <application-slug>` are used throughout this guide. The latter only appears once I think?

        iconUrl: "https://authentik.company/static/dist/assets/icons/icon.png"
        scopes: "email profile"
```

> ## Configuration verification

Reviewer: Can we add a ressources section linking to official docs/references like I started adding in existing integrations?

3. Set the following required configurations:
    - **Authentication Name**: `authentik` (This must match the name used in the **Redirect URI** in the previous section)
    - **OAuth2 Provider**: `OpenID Connect`
    - **Client ID (Key)**: Enter the Client ID from authentik.
    - **Client Secret**: Enter the Client Secret from authentik.
    - **Icon URL**: `https://authentik.company/static/dist/assets/icons/icon.png`
    - **OpenID Connect Auto Discovery URL**: `https://authentik.company/application/o/<slug>/.well-known/openid-configuration`
    - **Additional Scopes**: `email profile`

![](./gitea1.png)

4. Click **Add Authentication Source**.

### Claims for authorization management (optional)

:::note
This step is _optional_ and shows how to set claims to control the permissions of users in Gitea by adding them to groups.
:::

#### Create groups

The following groups will be created:

- `gituser`: normal Gitea users.
- `gitadmin`: Gitea users with administrative permissions.
- `gitrestricted`: restricted Gitea users.

:::note
Users who are in none of these groups will not be able to log in to gitea.
:::

> 1. Log in to authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
```

2. Navigate to **Directory** > **Groups** and click **Create**.

> 3. Set the name of the group as `gituser` and click **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Set the group name to `gituser` and click **Create**.
```

4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 to create two additional groups named `gitadmin` and `gitrestricted`.
5. Click the name of a newly created group and navigate to the **Users** tab.
6. Click **Add existing user**, select the user/s that need Gitea access and click **Add**.
7. Repeat steps 5 and 6 for the two additional groups.

> :::Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
```

> Users can be added to the groups at any point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can be added to the groups at any point.
```

    secret: "CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_AUTHENTIK" #Step 1
```

> 2. Add the following configurations to your Gitea Helm Chart `values.yaml` file:

Reviewer: IMO, we shouldn't repeat the file name twice: once here and once in the codeblock below

```yaml showLineNumbers title="values.yaml"
gitea:
    oauth:
        - name: "authentik"

>         provider: "openidConnect"

Reviewer: same as above

        existingSecret: gitea-authentik-secret
        autoDiscoverUrl: "https://authentik.company/application/o/gitea-slug/.well-known/openid-configuration"
        iconUrl: "https://goauthentik.io/img/icon.png"
        scopes: "email profile"
```

## Configuration verification

> To confirm that authentik is properly configured with Gitea, log out and log back in via the **Sign in with authentik** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify that authentik is correctly set up with Gitea, log out and then log back in using the **Sign in with authentik** button.
```
